Just a little bit of that, he said, these are, in the middle of the samsaktins, these are
introducing or pointing out teaching of Dzogchen.
That is what he said, pointing out teaching of the Dzogchen practices.
That is, generally, again in Dzogchen teaching, what is called Dzogchen teaching?
With instruction teaching can be divided, nor can be, it is known as two great practices.
Two practices and toga practices, two practices, tucku and toga.
Tucku is a very old, which many of you already know, but cutting thoroughly.
Cutting thoroughly, what means cutting thoroughly, all the propagation of the duality, instantly
cutting thoroughly,
that teaching technique is known as tucku teachings.
And then there is another teaching, Dzogchen teaching, known as toga teachings.
Lipping over teaching or instantly lipping over teaching.
These two teachings are what are they, generally, they are both the nature of our mind.
The emptiness aspect of our nature of the mind or the dharmakaya nature is explained clearly,
beautifully, thoroughly.
That teaching is known as tucku teachings, dharmakaya teaching, dharmakaya nature of the mind.
Dharmakaya nature of the mind is emptiness, unimpeded.
That nature, we went so many times, you know that, that is.
And then this nature of the mind has another aspect, clarity aspect.
Clarity aspect of teaching is known as toga practices.
This toga teaching is the nature of the mind, clarity aspect of the nature of the mind.
Both are the nature of the mind.
It is inseparable states.
This particular teaching, katneh shola, or this teaching what we are going through,
is teaching on the tucku or teachings on the dharmakaya emptiness nature of the mind.
We are exploring our nature of the mind.
And here, again, it is the important outer teaching of the dharmakaya tucku teachings.
Now, tucku teaching can be, again, I can bring up that statement, the thought, to make clear, kind
of clear.
And there is quite a, maybe, one or a few people, maybe, just quite new.
What tucku teaching? Summarized by many great masters, but one of the very famous renowned one,
summarized by great master, Garab Dorji.
Garab Dorji's teaching, all tucku teaching, summarized in three words.
That is what we call tsuksam netti, pointing out of three word teachings, or three word teachings
of three words.
And first is what? Introducing or pointing out the nature of the mind.
Pointing out, and that is, again, whenever you know it, more rantotte, deeper. More rantotte,
deeper.
More means what? A little bit, ever used word by word. More means the past, past, our past.
Rantot means, rantot means within its own self, within own self.
Deepa means introducing or pointing out.
So pointing out one's own past or natural, its own nature, its own status, status.
Once on, once on status. So that means, again, to make comment to you,
our nature, your natural mind is pointing out to your self, or to our self, to our self.
This nature is not pointing outside to the mountain or the moon or the sun or the star.
It is pointing out to your own nature, our own nature of the mind.
What that nature is known as generally in the Buddha's terminology is nathangatangara.
Buddha nature, that you heard many times, pointing out that Buddha nature, this Buddha nature,
pointing out.
This Buddha nature, you know, is ordinary nature.
Means it's your, our nature, each of our nature, ordinary.
It's been with us, from the, what in the Buddha's teaching is it, from the big and less times.
From the big and less, there is no even times that we can put, from the big and less times.
Until now, it's right here.
That is pointing out. That is pointing, that is showing us that.
Now, this nature, nature of mind, or this mind has two aspects, and we look at them.
There is samsara aspect, nirvana aspect.
O is what's called, alaya aspect and dharmakaya aspect.
This time, what is pointed out is dharmakaya, own nature of the mind.
Not the alaya or in the Zouki teaching, conception.
Not pointing out the conception, pointing out our own, any nature of, of dharmakaya,
which in other terminology is atagatagarva, Buddha nature, Buddha nature, nature.
That is what it is.
How is that dharmakaya nature is?
What is the difference between the conception and the dharmakaya, alaya and the dharmakaya?
Dharmakaya is the source of all the enlightenment in pure land, for example.
What is alaya? Alaya is the source of all samsaras.
Alaya is the source of samsara, and dharmakaya is the source of nirvana, a very useful word.
Where these both are, within the mind, there is no difference, difference at all.
What is alaya? Alaya or the subcontinent in the storehouse, it is a very basic source,
a very beginning of the dualities, dualities.
That is how it begins, begins the samsara disciplines.
When we are freed from out of that nature, to where?
Within that nature, within that space of dharmakaya, when you are freed,
that is known as dharmakaya, when you are freed.
That is the source of all the nirvanas.
So this time, what is pointing out?
Where Garab Durya or Dzokhi Tiji is pointing out as directly to that authentic nature of dharmakaya
,
which is never diluted by the dualities, cannot be diluted by dualities,
cannot and will not and is not.
That nature is pointing out.
But what is that nature? Dharmakaya nature is the rupa.
Dzokhi Tiji says rupa. What is rupa is?
First rupa or dharmakaya is the ordinary nature, as I said many times.
And the teaching is the basic foundation or basic, the ordinary nature of the summoner-buddha,
the Buddha summoner-buddha, your own summoner-buddha.
We went to the beginning of the Dzokhi Tiji, there is five summoner-buddha can be divided.
The foundation summoner-buddha, part summoner-buddha,
and result summoner-buddha, and Buddha summoner-buddha inherited summoner-buddha.
Five different summoner-buddha, we went through those things.
This is the basic summoner-buddha of each of us.
We all have this nature, this.
This summoner-buddha is what, how that nature is.
As I said many times, in a minute, I'm a great master.
As I always said, Khadibadi Heron said to you, "Uninvited, transparent, free from all the
complexities,
free from all the extremes."
Think of those words, this is not just wording, it's exploring the deep meaning of our nature.
Each of those words are inexpressible, inconceivable.
That is your nature, that is my nature, that is everyone's nature.
That is what the Garab Dogi is pointing out.
Hey, we all have that nature.
This is, in this level, the Buddha Shakyamuni and our Salah, and the small cockroaches,
cockroaches has no difference, no difference.
Nature is the same.
Almost, no difference.
All is the same.
Nature, the basic, that's what we'll be trying to preserve, summoner-buddha.
What do you say?
I and all the sentient beings share the same nature.
We enjoin the prayer of Qantasam.
Same nature, there's no difference.
This is what we have to recognize.
If we didn't recognize this nature, when we're meditating, then our path will be not recognized.
All is diluted.
Our achievement will be diluted too.
So there, number one, here in the teaching, he said here too.
Here, in this teaching, he said, "It's very important."
We didn't come here after that, but at the end of this song he said, "This is very important.
We didn't recognize the world perfectly.
It looks like mixing up the day one."
If the day one is mixed up, then here he said, "Then all this will be mixed up under the full moons
."
And this is the song that Surya said, "Nomid, nomid person, nomid person."
Qantas said, "Oh, this today is positive."
Positive or second is something he said.
But full moons are shining in the night time.
Right there, full moon, Swiss full moon.
But for him, he said, "Today is," he started saying that until moon comes,
he started saying it is second or third or something.
This he said that.
Because he mixed up the dates, dates mixed up.
Similarly, like this, if we mix up the will, we will mix up the path and we will mix up the
achievement.
Therefore, will is very important.
And what is will?
Again, it's unimpeded.
Emptiness, openness, vastness, inconceivable, inexpressible, unborn, honest.
How clearly Buddha Shakyamuni said, one after another, this gracious type of teacher said.
As I said before, this is not just a kind of methodology of the story or telling some spiritual
other side.
We can experience our own inner intelligent wisdom.
Find out it's true or not.
Right here.
Put it through the Madhiva teaching and generally the Sutra Buddha teaching.
Kind of looks like you have to immigrate outside to find you have to be very intelligent.
Kind of all started, told and all this.
But this time, he's pointing out and struggling to rediscover all that nature,
all that will be detected right with our heart, right with our mind.
Ask us is true or not.
Nature of mind is inconceivable or not.
Ask us.
Nature of mind is inexpressible.
Nature of mind is unborn, unceasing, or beyond unborn, unceasing.
Ask us.
It's true or not.
This is very important.
Again here, Graham asked, we should build the certainty of wisdom to the view.
Intellect, certainty of wisdom.
Confidence truly sees itself as it is.
This wisdom, now this old nature of this garabdodh is one point out of the first one.
Then it also can be introduced as what?
Three verses.
As I said the other day, sometimes many of you know this.
It's called the wisdom of the great emptiness.
Wisdom of the clarity.
Wisdom is union.
Union.
What that means?
When you look to the nature of the mind, when you look to gather our nature of the mind,
it's the empty, it's the open, it's the vastness as I said so many times.
That is wisdom.
That is the wisdom.
That is intelligence.
So this is called the wisdom of the emptiness.
Or the wisdom of the emptiness of Dharmakayas.
Dharmakaya is the wisdom of the emptiness.
And then there is emptiness, not blame-emptiness, not negation status, not black hole.
It is fullness, clarity.
That is the wisdom.
Clarity is the wisdom which is known as Anzogji teaching.
What?
Sambokaya wisdom.
This is Sambokaya wisdom.
And then this clarity and emptiness is union.
There is no separation that we can make difference.
That is known as union.
That is also known as pervasive energy.
Tugyam or the pervasive intelligence of compassion.
Compassion.
That is the wisdom.
So this is the nature of the mind, your nature of the mind,
my nature of the mind, everyone's nature of the mind is within 3 Gaya status.
3 Gaya status.
3 wisdom status, 3 Gaya status.
So therefore, this is the original Buddha,
the original awakened Buddha, Sambokaya.
We must be recognized.
We must be happy, joy, to discover this nature.
We've been wondering in samsara why, because we didn't recognize,
we didn't keep up that nature, call it as it is.
We dilute it.
Dilute it.
So that is really a border, first and to do it.
The point of the morato, the Bhagavat dojis,
first walk, morato drop.
It's right here.
That is that. Right here.
Now this...